---
title: "Chores 2023"
date: 2023-09-07
layout: post
abstract: "Gotta keep the little ones busy, teaching problem-solving skills is just the cherry on top!"
author: Andrew McKnight
tags: funny
---
_One morning, restless kid sulks..._
<br />
<br />
<br />
"go chop some wood"

"but daaad we don't even have a fireplace"

"we'll find a use for it later"

"we don't have an ax either. or wood"

"you're smart, you'll think of something. now please, i'm very busy"

✨ _puts finishing touches on trump mugshot meme_ ✨

<center>***</center>

_...four hours later..._

⚡️ phone buzzes ⚡️

_glances up at notification in daze after arguing on the internet without blinking since the most recent after-lunch coffee_

_an unknown local number is calling..._

"Mr. Andrew McKnight?"

"speaking"

"we have your daughter here, we received a report that someone was... chainsawing a utility pole behind the 7-eleven on Hoadly Rd near Dale Blvd. a squad car went to check it out, where they found her wearing earmuffs and ski goggles, struggling to get the saw free after the pole collapsed over the cut and bound the blade. the wires were the only thing supporting the weight, it could've fallen on her or even cars passing by. the utility company is there now making emergency repairs. i think you'd better come down here so we can discuss charges"

"charges? i've seen those lines, they can't be any more than 50 kilovolts"

"excuse me?"

_...she remembered her eyes and ears..._

"sir, please, just come on down to the station..."

_...we didn't even own a chainsaw..._

_proud dad tear_

{% include blog-post-image.html source="satisfied-nod.gif" alt="Jeremiah Johnson satisfied nod" narrow="true" %}
