---
title: TUI v. GUI
date: 2025-10-23
author: Andrew McKnight
layout: post
tags: software engineering tech
abstract:
---

Ah, the age-old programmer holy war. I don’t mean spaces vs tabs. No, not SCM supremacy, there’s no discussion to be had there: Git is the GOAT. No, I’m talking about the types programs we programmers use on our machines to do the work of programming.

They come in two broad categories, although I’m wont to joke that textual user interfaces (TUIs) are actually a subset of graphical user interfaces (GUIs). I generally see GUIs as inferior for several reasons:
- Pirate’s cove problem: poor discoverability of features. You have to already know how to do something before you can do it. There is nuance here in terms of docs websites, things like macos’ help menu (which is a pirate’s cove in and of itself) or the “command palette“ pattern, and bad/missing manpages, but generally, searching textual documentation is better for CLIs IMO.
- No way to assemble features into new features. Anything you can do in a terminal can be scripted together, abstracted ad infinitum.
- Mousing is slower than typing, especially when typing what are essentially macros with vast meaning behind them, see previous point. you can encode similar macro function behind buttons in a GUI, but there is limited screen space and you risk running afoul of [Fitt’s law](/blog/2024/04/10/laws-we-never-voted-in.html), see previous point, and to combat this you wind up with complex organizations or large keychord libraries leading to poor discoverability, see first point.
- Durability and experimentation: you can’t git diff the evolution of your GUI usage like you can with a script, and eventually the GUI will change out from under you or the entire program may disappear. (RIP Adobe Fireworks! Which actually had a really neat macro facility. If you knew where to look.) You can feasibly retain all the source code required to preserve a scripted tool.

There is a reason chat interfaces are eating software right now with LLMs and I think it’s because human language processing centers in the brain are capable of vastly more complex logical reasoning vs the visuospatial structures. I’d even argue that, since the visuospatial system is more integrated into our sympathetic nervous system–the one that governs the fight-or-flight response–GUIs are a more stressful experience in general. It’s like walking through the jungle, watching out for jaguars.
